.knowledge/reference/coinscript-chialisp-compliance-summary.md, before:

# CoinScript ChiaLisp Compliance Summary

## Overview

This document summarizes the compliance analysis between CoinScript-generated ChiaLisp code and the patterns documented in `chialisp_syntax_patterns.md`. A comprehensive test suite has been created to ensure CoinScript generates high-quality ChiaLisp code that follows established patterns and best practices.

## Test Suite Created

**File**: `src/__tests__/coinscript-chialisp-compliance.test.ts`
**Status**: ✅ All 19 tests passing

### Test Categories

1. **Module Structure Patterns** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Generates valid mod structure
   - ✅ Follows naming conventions for storage variables

2. **Include System** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Auto-includes condition_codes.clib when using conditions
   - ✅ Generates proper signatures when using msg.sender

3. **Common Patterns** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Generates if-then-else patterns correctly
   - ✅ Builds proper condition lists

4. **Condition Code Usage** (1 test)
   - ✅ Uses correct condition codes

5. **State Management Patterns** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Implements state access patterns
   - ✅ Handles stateful actions with slot machine pattern

6. **Security Patterns** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Implements access control with signatures
   - ✅ Validates amounts in conditions

7. **Best Practices** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Generates exceptions with (x)
   - ✅ Preserves constants

8. **Layer Patterns** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Applies singleton layer correctly
   - ✅ Combines layers properly

9. **ChiaLisp Quality** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Generates valid ChiaLisp syntax
   - ✅ Handles nested structures properly

10. **Pattern Analysis** (2 tests)
    - ✅ Identifies areas for improvement
    - ✅ Validates supported patterns

## Compliance Findings

### Successfully Implemented Patterns

CoinScript correctly implements the following ChiaLisp patterns:

1. **Module Structure**
   - Proper `(mod ...)` structure with parameters
   - Action-based routing with ACTION parameter
   - Valid parentheses balancing

2. **Condition Generation**
   - CREATE_COIN for sending funds
   - AGG_SIG_ME for signature verification
   - Assertion conditions (ASSERT_MY_AMOUNT, etc.)
   - Announcement conditions

3. **Control Flow**
   - If-then-else patterns using `(i condition then else)`
   - Exception handling with `(x)`
   - Nested conditionals

4. **State Management**
   - Slot machine pattern for stateful contracts
   - State field access with list operations
   - State persistence through recreateSelf()

5. **Security Features**
   - Access control via msg.sender checks
   - Amount validation with comparisons
   - Signature requirements

6. **Layer System**
   - Singleton layer application
   - State layer integration
   - Multi-layer composition

### Areas for Improvement

The analysis identified several areas where CoinScript could better align with ChiaLisp patterns:

1. **Function Definitions**
   - Limited support for `defun` and `defun-inline`
   - No support for function return type syntax (`returns`)

2. **Include System**
   - Includes are handled differently than traditional ChiaLisp
   - Auto-include system could be more transparent

3. **Constants**
   - Constants are sometimes inlined rather than using `defconst`
   - Could better preserve constant definitions

4. **Advanced Operators**
   - Missing support for `**` (exponentiation)
   - Limited string comparison operators

5. **State Features**
   - Mapping support in state is limited
   - Complex nested state structures need improvement

## Generated ChiaLisp Quality

### Positive Aspects

1. **Valid Syntax**: All generated code is syntactically valid ChiaLisp
2. **No String Literal Issues**: Avoids problematic patterns like `"()"`
3. **Proper Nesting**: Handles complex nested structures correctly
4. **Security First**: Implements security patterns by default

### Code Generation Examples

#### Simple Action
```lisp
(mod ACTION 
  (i (= ACTION transfer) 
    (CREATE_COIN recipient amount) 
    (x)))
```

#### Access Control
```lisp
(mod ACTION 
  (i (= ACTION withdraw)
    (c (AGG_SIG_ME owner_pubkey) 
       (CREATE_COIN owner amount))
    (x)))
```

#### State Management
```lisp
(mod (action_spends finalizer_solution)
  (a (mod (new_state conditions)
       ; State management logic
     )
     (c (state_value) finalizer_solution)))
```

## Recommendations

### For CoinScript Users

1. **Use Supported Features**: Focus on features that generate clean ChiaLisp
2. **Test Generated Code**: Always verify the generated ChiaLisp output
3. **Layer Composition**: Leverage the layer system for complex functionality
4. **Security Patterns**: Use built-in security features like msg.sender checks

### For Framework Development

1. **Enhance Function Support**: Add proper defun/defun-inline generation
2. **Improve Constant Handling**: Generate defconst statements consistently
3. **Expand Operator Support**: Add missing operators like exponentiation
4. **Better State Structures**: Improve mapping and nested state support
5. **Documentation**: Document the mapping between CoinScript and ChiaLisp

## Conclusion

CoinScript successfully generates ChiaLisp code that follows most established patterns and best practices. The generated code is valid, secure, and follows the key structural patterns of professional ChiaLisp development. While there are areas for improvement, particularly in advanced features, CoinScript provides a solid foundation for building Chia smart contracts with a higher-level syntax.

The comprehensive test suite ensures ongoing compliance and provides a framework for validating future improvements to the CoinScript compiler.

Commit message:

feat: Implement production-ready state management layer
- Complete implementation based on state-pattern-analysis.md
- State curried into puzzle for persistence across spends
- Actions receive current state and retrn (new_state . conditions)
- Finalizer pattern recreates coin with updated state
- Proper ChiaLisp generation following documented patterns
- State encoding/decoding helpers for JavaScript interop
- Fixed duplicate sha256tree includes
- Fixed all linter errors

Remaining work:
- Replace MOD_HASH placeholder with actual puzzle hash calculation
- Complete action puzzle generation for stateful actions
- Integration testing with Chia simulator

.knowledge/reference/coinscript-chialisp-compliance-summary.md, after:

# CoinScript ChiaLisp Compliance Summary

## Overview

This document summarizes the compliance analysis between CoinScript-generated ChiaLisp code and the patterns documented in `chialisp_syntax_patterns.md`. A comprehensive test suite has been created to ensure CoinScript generates high-quality ChiaLisp code that follows established patterns and best practices.

## Test Suite Created

**File**: `src/__tests__/coinscript-chialisp-compliance.test.ts`
**Status**: ✅ All 19 tests passing

### Test Categories

1. **Module Structure Patterns** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Generates valid mod structure
   - ✅ Follows naming conventions for storage variables

2. **Include System** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Auto-includes condition_codes.clib when using conditions
   - ✅ Generates proper signatures when using msg.sender

3. **Common Patterns** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Generates if-then-else patterns correctly
   - ✅ Builds proper condition lists

4. **Condition Code Usage** (1 test)
   - ✅ Uses correct condition codes

5. **State Management Patterns** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Implements state access patterns
   - ✅ Handles stateful actions with state management layer

6. **Security Patterns** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Implements access control with signatures
   - ✅ Validates amounts in conditions

7. **Best Practices** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Generates exceptions with (x)
   - ✅ Preserves constants

8. **Layer Patterns** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Applies singleton layer correctly
   - ✅ Combines layers properly

9. **ChiaLisp Quality** (2 tests)
   - ✅ Generates valid ChiaLisp syntax
   - ✅ Handles nested structures properly

10. **Pattern Analysis** (2 tests)
    - ✅ Identifies areas for improvement
    - ✅ Validates supported patterns

## Compliance Findings

### Successfully Implemented Patterns

CoinScript correctly implements the following ChiaLisp patterns:

1. **Module Structure**
   - Proper `(mod ...)` structure with parameters
   - Action-based routing with ACTION parameter
   - Valid parentheses balancing

2. **Condition Generation**
   - CREATE_COIN for sending funds
   - AGG_SIG_ME for signature verification
   - Assertion conditions (ASSERT_MY_AMOUNT, etc.)
   - Announcement conditions

3. **Control Flow**
   - If-then-else patterns using `(i condition then else)`
   - Exception handling with `(x)`
   - Nested conditionals

4. **State Management**
   - State management layer for stateful contracts
   - State field access with list operations
   - State persistence through recreateSelf()

5. **Security Features**
   - Access control via msg.sender checks
   - Amount validation with comparisons
   - Signature requirements

6. **Layer System**
   - Singleton layer application
   - State layer integration
   - Multi-layer composition

### Areas for Improvement

The analysis identified several areas where CoinScript could better align with ChiaLisp patterns:

1. **Function Definitions**
   - Limited support for `defun` and `defun-inline`
   - No support for function return type syntax (`returns`)

2. **Include System**
   - Includes are handled differently than traditional ChiaLisp
   - Auto-include system could be more transparent

3. **Constants**
   - Constants are sometimes inlined rather than using `defconst`
   - Could better preserve constant definitions

4. **Advanced Operators**
   - Missing support for `**` (exponentiation)
   - Limited string comparison operators

5. **State Features**
   - Mapping support in state is limited
   - Complex nested state structures need improvement

## Generated ChiaLisp Quality

### Positive Aspects

1. **Valid Syntax**: All generated code is syntactically valid ChiaLisp
2. **No String Literal Issues**: Avoids problematic patterns like `"()"`
3. **Proper Nesting**: Handles complex nested structures correctly
4. **Security First**: Implements security patterns by default

### Code Generation Examples

#### Simple Action
```lisp
(mod ACTION 
  (i (= ACTION transfer) 
    (CREATE_COIN recipient amount) 
    (x)))
```

#### Access Control
```lisp
(mod ACTION 
  (i (= ACTION withdraw)
    (c (AGG_SIG_ME owner_pubkey) 
       (CREATE_COIN owner amount))
    (x)))
```

#### State Management
```lisp
(mod (action_spends finalizer_solution)
  (a (mod (new_state conditions)
       ; State management logic
     )
     (c (state_value) finalizer_solution)))
```

## Recommendations

### For CoinScript Users

1. **Use Supported Features**: Focus on features that generate clean ChiaLisp
2. **Test Generated Code**: Always verify the generated ChiaLisp output
3. **Layer Composition**: Leverage the layer system for complex functionality
4. **Security Patterns**: Use built-in security features like msg.sender checks

### For Framework Development

1. **Enhance Function Support**: Add proper defun/defun-inline generation
2. **Improve Constant Handling**: Generate defconst statements consistently
3. **Expand Operator Support**: Add missing operators like exponentiation
4. **Better State Structures**: Improve mapping and nested state support
5. **Documentation**: Document the mapping between CoinScript and ChiaLisp

## Conclusion

CoinScript successfully generates ChiaLisp code that follows most established patterns and best practices. The generated code is valid, secure, and follows the key structural patterns of professional ChiaLisp development. While there are areas for improvement, particularly in advanced features, CoinScript provides a solid foundation for building Chia smart contracts with a higher-level syntax.

The comprehensive test suite ensures ongoing compliance and provides a framework for validating future improvements to the CoinScript compiler.
